---
title: "Links"
animation_path: "img/gondwana.gif"
animation_alt: "Gondwana"
---

How did Gondwana break up exactly?  The southern continents – more than half the
world’s land area – share much geological and tectonic history.  The formation
of Gondwana as a ‘supercontinent’ was completed at the start of Phanerozoic
times, about 540 million years ago (540 Ma). It remained intact as a single
large landmass for two-thirds of the time between then and now, eventually
starting to fragment in the Jurassic period, about 184 Ma. During Early
Cretaceous times, especially in the interval 140-120 Ma, most of the present
continental outlines were established and these fragments started moving apart
to give the familiar geography of today with almost half of the world’s oceans
now separating them. The research presented here has attempted to define step by
step the history of this dispersal against the geological time-scale and in
geometrical detail. While evidence of all sorts has been used, it is the careful
interpretation of the topography of the sea floor, revealed in detail by
satellite gravimetry only since about 1997, that has been key to this new
understanding. The continental margins formed in the process - and the rifts
that have penetrated but not separated the present-day continents - are of
immense economic importance.  The links below lead to a large resource of
information from the principles of global tectonics by way of graphic animations
and published texts to the latest pre-publication research ideas.
